I find myself on the Steam Store a lot. It's fun to click around and look at games, but I rarely make a purchase. Recently, a game in the "popular upcoming" section called [SQUARE ENIX AI Tech Preview: THE PORTOPIA SERIAL MURDER CASE](https://store.steampowered.com/app/2280000/SQUARE_ENIX_AI_Tech_Preview_THE_PORTOPIA_SERIAL_MURDER_CASE/) caught my attention. The Steam page has this to say about the game:

>This software is an educational demonstration of Natural Language Processing (NLP), an AI technology, as applied to the adventure game “The Portopia Serial Murder Case” (created by Yuji Horii and first published in Japan in 1983). At the time of the game’s original release, most adventure games were played using a “command input” system, where the player was asked to type in text to decide the actions of their character. Free text input systems like these allowed players to feel a great deal of freedom. However, they did come with one common source of frustration: players knowing what action they wanted to perform but being unable to do so because they could not find the right wording. This problem was caused by the limitations of PC performance and NLP technology of the time. 40 years have passed since then, and PC performance has drastically improved, as have the capabilities of NLP technology. Using “The Portopia Serial Murder Case” as a test case, we’d like to show you the capabilities of modern NLP and the impact it can have on adventure games, as well as deepen your understanding of NLP technologies.

It's exciting to see a company like Square Enix experimenting with NLP technology. I wonder what techniques they are using to accomplish this. Unfortunately, it seems like they haven't shared any details about it yet. The blog for SQUARE ENIX AI Division] has this to say on its [latest post](https://www.jp.square-enix.com/ai-division/en/2023/04/square-enix-ai-tech-preview-the-portopia-serial-murder-case-will-be-available.html):

> So what is NLP? Don't worry, our experts will explain it soon on this AI technology blog. In the meantime, please wait a while and try the trending technology called NLP for yourself!

## Colossal Cave Adventure

I got inspired to try my hand at enhancing a text adventure game myself. What better place to start than [Colossal Cave Adventure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colossal_Cave_Adventure) by [Will Crowther](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Crowther_(programmer))? Widely considered the first text adventure game in the "interactive fiction" genre, Colossal Cave Adventure (or "Adventure") centers around entering a cave system with unknown treasures inside. For a wealth of information about the game and its creation, check out the lovely site by [Rick Adams](https://rickadams.org/adventure/).

### Goals

The two goals for this project were:

1. Have fun
2. Improve understanding of software (PyTorch, RWKV-LM, OpenAI API, et al.)

Therefore, the approach I took probably wasn't the most effective or canonical method. However, it gave me an excuse to play with a few new technologies, and I learned a lot.

### Game command execution

I chose [open-adventure](https://gitlab.com/esr/open-adventure) for an implementation of Colossal Cave Adventure. I really enjoyed seeing that ESR was actively developing it. The game instructions include the following message:

> I will be your eyes and hands. Direct me with commands of 1 or 2 words. I should warn you that I look at only the first five letters of each word, so you'll have to enter "Northeast" as "ne" to distinguish it from "North." (Should you get stuck, type "help" or "info" for some general hints).

This is what the [game's command type](https://gitlab.com/esr/open-adventure/-/blob/f0119f8431be30713e29ef89a63a45d0fa28111c/advent.h#L282) looks like (comments my own):

```c
typedef struct {
    enum speechpart part; // unknown, intransitive, transitive
    command_word_t word[2]; // NO_WORD_TYPE, MOTION, OBJECT, ACTION, NUMERIC
    verb_t verb; // Command verb parsed from word array
    obj_t obj; // Command object parsed from word array (transitive only)
    command_state_t state;
} command_t;
```

There are four types of words, sourced from a [YAML dictionary](https://gitlab.com/esr/open-adventure/-/blob/f0119f8431be30713e29ef89a63a45d0fa28111c/adventure.yaml):

|Word type|Description|
|-|-|
|Motion|Location the player can move|
|Object|Specific in-game objects|
|Action|Valid player actions|
|Numeric|Nonnegative integers|

The user inputs 1-2 of these words for a command. If the game doesn't have enough context to execute an action, it may ask the player followup questions. Once enough context is available, it [performs the action](https://gitlab.com/esr/open-adventure/-/blob/f0119f8431be30713e29ef89a63a45d0fa28111c/main.c#L1165).

### Plan

1. Since all words greater than 5 characters have been truncated, run a chat completion model to compute the word completions.
2. Given the command to word(s) mapping, generate a corpus of sentences that map plain English sentences into game commands.
3. Finetune an [RWKV-LM]() model on the examples sentences. Ideally, this will use RWKV-Pile-169M since it has the lowest hardware requirements.
4. Write a program that reads user input in a loop. The finetuned RWKV model converts the user input to a game command which is sent to a subprocess running open-adventure. The output of the game is piped back to the user's console.

## What's next

Over the next couple of days, I will describe how each component was built. The last post will include a link to the repository where you can play with the game itself. Happy caving!
